## Hypertext Markup Language

- html layer: the actual content that will be rendered in a web page

- Recall your earlier school days when your teacher returned your homework with red marks on it. Misspelled words, bad grammar, or other such mistakes would be circled or highlighted. You might call that a marked-up document.

- Similarly, a markup language is used to call out parts of the document and provide instructions or background information. The markup is provided to the browser as instructions for how this should be rendered. As such, this markup itself must be syntactically precise.

- HTML5 is a relatively mature standard, or more accurately, a set of standards that is managed by the World Wide Web Consortium (W3C).

## HTML Document

- HTML is generally produced and consumed as a document. We may talk about snippets of HTML but in most cases, a web site will respond to a request with a complete HTML document, which is then parsed by the client and rendered on a device.

- ```html
  <!DOCTYPE html>
  <html lang="en">
    <head>
      <meta charset="utf-8" />
      <title>HTML5 Sample Document</title>
    </head>
    <body>
      Hello World!
    </body>
  </html>
  ```

## Elements

- The document is comprised of several HTML elements that are nested in a hierarchical fashion

- Like other markup languages, tags are used to annotate content with useful information

- ```html
  <tag attribute="value" ...> content </tag>
  ```

- In most cases each element has an open and close tag that are identical except the close tag is preceded by a “/” character. Sometimes the terms element and tag are used interchangeably;

- to be precise, however, an element is comprised of an opening and closing tag and the content that is found between these tags.

- Elements will often contain other elements. For better readability, this nested hierarchy is illustrated by indenting child elements.

## DOCTYPE

- The DOCTYPE element is an oddity and doesn’t fit any of the standard element formats. There is a bit of history behind it as well. In the early days of web development (think IE4 and Netscape), web pages were developed against how the current browsers were implemented

- As the HTML specifications evolved and matured, new browsers developed against the updated specifications would not work with the older web pages.

- The DOCTYPE element was introduced so each page could specify the version of the specification that it was written against. The browser would need to interpret this and provide the necessary backward compatibility.

- Fortunately, with HTML5 the DOCTYPE can be essentially ignored. Just set it to html:

- ```html
  <!DOCTYPE html>
  ```

## Attributes

- An opening tag can include one or more attributes. Attributes are used to provide details about an element.

- The html element, for example, contains lang="en", which informs the browser that the content is written in English. The browser may use this to offer to translate the content if English is not the current language.

- There is a set of attributes called global attributes that can be used on any HTML element. The most common ones that you’ll use are id and class. The id attribute defines a unique key for an element; it must be unique within the entire HTML document. This is often used when accessing an element in JavaScript. The class attribute is sometimes called the CSS class, because it is often used for applying styles to an element. Unlike id, the class attribute is a non-unique key; a single value is applied to elements that need to have identical formatting.

- In addition to the global attributes, each element type may support other attributes. Notice that the meta element includes a charset attribute:

- ```html
  <meta charset="utf-8" />
  ```

- The charset attribute specifies the type of character-set encoding that this page uses You should always define the character set; however, this is particularly important if your page needs to display nonstandard characters.

- There are some Boolean attributes that do not need a value; their existence indicates a true value and their absence means false. For example, a check box has a checked attribute if checked and this attribute is removed if not checked. You may see something like checked="checked", especially in dynamic HTML that is generated by server-side code. However, the browser will ignore the value and you only need to include the attribute; no value is needed.

## Miscellaneous Structure Rules

- Notice that the meta element does not have a closing tag. There are a few elements that do not have to use a closing tag, which are referred to as self-closing tags. It may be somewhat obvious, but these elements cannot have any content since the content is placed between the opening and closing tags. The “/” character at the end of the tag is technically optional, but the general consensus is that it should be included and some HTML validators will flag this as a warning if it’s not there.

- Keep in mind that whitespace characters such as tabs, carriage returns, and extra spaces are ignored by the browser. You can left-align all of the text and the rendered HTML will be identical. You could even put the entire document on a single line if you really wanted to. But the general convention and best practice is to format the HTML like it is shown here.

- HTML tags are case insensitive. The general convention is to use all lowercase tags and I’ll be doing that throughout this book. But you could use <HEAD> or <Head> and it would be just as valid.

## Html Element

- So, as you’ve already seen, the html element is the root node: the starting point of your document. There’s not much to say about it. The html element can contain one head element and one body element. In addition to the global attributes, it also supports the manifest attribute.

- ```html
  <html manifest="www.mywebsite.com/cache.appcache"></html>
  ```

## Head Element

- There’s not any real content in the head element; that’s what the body element is for Now let’s look at the elements that can be included inside the head element. You’ve already seen the title and meta elements, which I’ll cover in a little more detail. There are a few other useful elements that belong here as well.

### Title Element

- ```html
  <title>Sample Document</title>
  ```

- The title element specifies the title of this page. This shows up in a couple of places:

  - In the browser title bar or tab
  - Search engines will usually include this in the search results
  - When adding a page to your favorites or bookmark, the title is used as the name

- Although somewhat obvious, you can only have one title element in your document. If you choose to ignore this rule, the browser will usually display the first title element and ignore the rest.

### Meta Element

- The meta element is an abbreviation for metadata, which is data that describes other data. In this case, the meta element describes the contents of the HTML document. The head element can include any number of meta elements, each providing a single data point using the name/value pair construct

- ```html
  <meta name="author" content="Hosein Ghanbari" />
  <meta name="description" content="Sample HTML document" />
  <meta http-equiv="refresh" content="30" />
  ```

- The value portion of the name/value pair is specified in the `content` attribute; however, the name portion is either defined in the `name` attribute or the `http-equiv` attribute, depending on the type of data being set.

- The name attribute is used for metadata that describes the content of the HTML document. The most common values for the name attribute are application-name, author, description, and keywords. These are all fairly self-explanatory. For keywords, the content attribute will contain a comma-separated list of keywords.

- The http-equiv attribute is used to simulate an http response header. The more common values are these:

  - content-type: the content attribute will specify a content type, typically text/html and a character set. For example, `content = "text/html; charset=UTF-8"`.
  - default-style - use this to specify the default style sheet
  - refresh - you can force the page to automatically refresh after a certain interval,
    which is specified, in seconds, in the content attribute.

- As demonstrated in the sample document, the character set can also be specified using the shortened notation: <meta charset="utf-8" />.

- There are a lot of other meta names that you can use.

### Script Element

- The script element is used to load JavaScript in your page. In order to use a function, you must either define it or load an external script file that contains the function. Either can be done in the script element.

- ```html
  <script type="text/javascript">
    function doSomething() {
      alert("Hello World!");
    }
  </script>
  ```

- The type attribute is optional and will default to text/javascript if not specified. This was required in HTML4 and you’ll see it included quite often.

- It is generally considered best practice to put JavaScript into a separate external file. One big advantage of doing that is to share the same script across multiple pages. To reference an external file, use the src attribute and do not include any content between the opening and closing tags. If you need to load multiple files, include each one in a separate script element.

- ```html
  <script src="../scripts/sample.js"></script>
  <script src="../scripts/demo.js"></script>
  ```

- Normally, as the browser is parsing an HTML document, when a script element is encountered, the script is loaded and executed before continuing to parse the rest of the document. For external files, you can use the async or defer attributes to change this behavior. Both of these are Boolean attributes.

- If the async attribute is specified, the file is loaded and executed in parallel, while the parsing process continues. Alternatively, if the defer attribute is used, the script will be executed only after the page has been fully parsed.

- ```html
  <script src="../scripts/demo.js" defer></script>
  ```

- You should use the defer attribute if the script has code that references any of the HTML elements. If it executes before the document is parsed, the script might fail because the elements are not yet available.

### Link Element

- The link element is used to reference additional external resources, which can be grouped into two categories. First, links are used to load resources that are used to render the source document – the most common of these being cascading style sheets. The second category is links to other related documents. The reader may choose to navigate to these documents but they are not needed to render the current page.

- The link element uses a self-closing tag, and the linked resource is specified entirely through attributes. This is done through the href attribute that defines the address of the resource and the rel attribute. The rel attribute, an abbreviation for relationship, indicates the relationship between the source document and the linked resource.

- ```html
  <link rel="icon" type="image/x-icon" href="site.ico" />
  <link rel="stylesheet" type="text/css" href="sample.css" />
  <link rel="alternate" type="text/plain" href="page.txt" />
  ```

- The link element can be used to reference many different types of resources for a lot of different reasons. Unfortunately, the term relationship does not always convey the best meaning of this attribute. For some of the most common values such as stylesheet and icon, this may be better interpreted as the type of resource rather than a relationship. For some, such as first, next, and alternate, relationship is indeed the proper term to use. However, for the sake of consistency, the rel attribute is used for all linked resources.

### Style Element

- The specific style attributes of an element such as color or size can be specified explicitly on the element, which is referred to as inline styles. The more common, and preferred, method however, is to define a set of rules that are used to determine the specific style attributes that are applied to the entire document.

- These rules are either included in an external style sheet (and referenced through the link element), or they are defined in a style element. In this regard, the style element is somewhat analogous to the script element, except it includes CSS content instead of JavaScript.

- There is one big difference between the style element and the script element. The script element is used for including JavaScript either in the content of the script element, or by referencing an external file with the src attribute. When including styles, you use the style element to define styles; however, the link element is used to load an external file. Another difference is that a link element can only be used inside a head element; a style element can be used in either a head or body element, although this is not widely supported yet.

- ```html
  <style>
    html {
      color: red;
    }
  </style>
  ```

- The style element supports the media attribute, which allows you to include a media query. A media query is a Boolean expression that can conditionally apply a set of styles. The styles are applied only if the expression evaluates to true. Media queries were originally intended to allow the same document to be formatted differently when rendered in print form. For example, the following style is applied only when printing a document:

- ```html
  <style media="print">
    html {
      color: black;
    }
  </style>
  ```

## For further reading

- https://html.spec.whatwg.org/multipage/syntax.html
- http://www.html5rocks.com/en/tutorials/appcache/beginner/
- http://www.html-5.com/metatags
- https://www.w3.org/TR/html5/links.html#linkTypes
